---
title: Ten Yokes of Jacob
---

PyCon 2016 starts in less than 48 hours. Something about the
anticipation had me jonesing for some talks from last year, and for
some reason I went with the keynote. I'm not typically a keynote
attendee, especially not after some of the past debacles, but wow, was
I late to the party.

Jacob Kaplan-Moss, the herald of Django, really laid it out. I'll
summarize, but here's a video in case you want a look:

In it, he explains why mediocrity is acceptable. The bell curve rules
everything around us. He uses his middling ultramarathon record as
proof. He surmises that lack of passion for work is leading people to
feel untalented. This, combined with "brilliant asshole" celebrity
programmers, are shaming people out of the industry. He wraps up with
a message of inclusivity, especially toward women.

Suffice to say, I agree with the beginning and the end. If you
consider yourself an average programmer, that is fine. As a field,
software must continnue reaching and integrating more women and other
underrepresented groups.

That said, I'm not sure how one could put more missteps between those
two points.

# The Corporate Angle

* Citing the job deficit in 2020 as a motivator for encouraging people
  to become engineers
 * The point of programming isn't to put butts in seats writing code
   for big companies
 * The point of programming is to teach people a new language and a
   new way of approaching and decomposing problems in an increasingly
   fast-paced and connected world. That's totally irrespective of
   employment. It's a new way of thinking for all people

Which brings us to the second problem. The commodification of creative
work. Software is not all creative. Plenty of time goes to setting up
environments and myriad other unautomated tasks. The problem is that
too many managers, including Jacobian, lump the creative part in with
the rest. More butts in seats.

# The 10x Programmer

Every 10x programmer I know spends their days as a 1x something
else. Most 10x code is the result of observing and accumulating 10x
more domain knowledge, then having the confidence and autonomy to
express oneself. It's an astronomically unique alignment of
circumstance, and that rarity is why the world needs everyone to be
exposed to the expressive tools of software. I have been called a 10x
programmer before, but when other aspects of my life take priority,
I'm an average programmer and just focus on getting my job done. 10x
programming is a matter of inspiration and creativity, something that
corporatism often steamrolls.

I take offense at this labeling. To list a few:

  * A programmer is more than someone who codes.
  * Physical tasks are infinitely more quantifiable than programming tasks.
  * etc.

* 10x programmers DO exist
  * A person is not a 10x programmer per se.
  * (see notes above)
  * Finally, a 10x programmer is not a 10x person. Quantifying quality
    here is grossly misguided. Many of the most creative people I
    know, understand very little about programming, and in some cases
    I think that's a real shame.
  * The great thing about Python is that you can teach so much
    programming with so little overhead. You give those highly
    creative people even a taste of programming and it opens up so
    much. Even just the shared vocabulary is a huge boost to cross
    pollination of ideas between disciplines.
  * Look at Python usage among biologists, neuroscientists, and other
    more academics and analysts. Their amazing results speak volumes,
    so there's no harm in saying that they're nowhere near the
    programming level of experienced Python systems engineers working
    on YouTube, PayPal, Continuum Analytics, etc.
  * It's ridiculous and inexcusable to put people on this single bell
    curve when their goals and disciplines are so different. Our
    language is the same, our cultures are mutually beneficial, but
    seeing people measured along this single dimension keeps me up at
    night.

# Tone-deaf privilege

It's said that the most sure sign of privilege is ignorance.

* A little aside on privilege
  * By virtue of simply *being* an ultra-runner, you *ARE* in the top tier.
  * By getting to that point, you've proven you have talent.
  * Trimming the y-axis and measuring among the top tier, then finding
    yourself wanting is exactly the definition of privilege.
  * TODO: draw conclusion to monetary 1%-ers?
  * If you're in the 60th percentile of ultrarunners, then you're in
    the top 1% of people who run, let alone those who can't.
* Bringing it back to professional privilege.
  * It doesn't help when you describe where you came from and
    then point out that your biggest contributions weren't
    actually yours. What are you doing on stage?
  * It's *really* not meaningful when someone at the top, who's had a
    successful career full of recognition, tells you it's not such a
    big deal to be at the top. You're on a stage, tens of thousands of
    people aren't. Own that and honor that. <!-- Instead you opened with
    trying and failing to play someone else's YouTube video. -->

<!-- We need as many people as possible to learn and teach programming
because some plurality of society has decided that software should eat
everything. -->
