---
title: Running from software
tags:
  - python
  - code
  - work
---

So while PyCon 2016 starts in less than 48 hours, some kind of
anticipation compelled me to polish off the last of
[the talks from last year][pycon_2015]. For some reason I went for a
keynote. I'm not typically a keynote attendee, and this time I missed
something big.[^pycon2016]

[^pycon2016]: Suffice to say, I'm already subscribed to [Python 2016][pycon_2016]

[pycon_2015]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCgxzjK6GuOHVKR_08TT4hJQ
[pycon_2016]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwTD5zJbsQGJN75MwbykYNw

[Jacob Kaplan-Moss][jacobian], the herald of [Django][django], really
laid something out. I'll give you the short version, but here's a
video in case you want a look:

[jacobian]: https://twitter.com/jacobian
[django]: https://www.djangoproject.com/

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hIJdFxYlEKE" frameborder="0"
allowfullscreen></iframe>

To summarize, Jacob sets out to explain why mediocrity is acceptable.
Bell curves rule everything around us. He holds up his middling
ultramarathon record as proof. He surmises that lack of passion for
work is leading people to feel untalented. This, combined with
"brilliant asshole" programmers, are shaming people out of the
industry. He wraps up with a message of inclusivity, especially toward
women. Now, you can probably make sense of any other details with
[the slides](/uploads/jacobian_pycon2015.pdf).

Above all, Jacob and I are in complete agreement with his opening and
closing. If you consider yourself an average programmer, that is fine
and probably better than the alternatives. Also, as a field, software
must continue reaching out to and integrating more underrepresented
groups, especially women.

That said, I'm not sure how one could have put more missteps between
those two points.[^2]

[^2]: Dear Jacob, if you are reading this, I just wanted to say no
      harsh feelings. It was a moving talk and I'm sure that most
      people got the good messages that bookended the talk. I hope you
      don't mind the criticism and still find it as interesting as you
      mentioned on stage. Hope it helps with future keynotes, and I'll
      be [right here](https://twitter.com/mhashemi) if you have any
      followups.

# The 10x Programmer

If Jacob makes one thing clear from the keynote, it's that years of
being called a 10x programmer has made him very uncomfortable. He
rejects the concept, as many have. Now I, too, have at various points
been called a rockstar, ninja, and 10xer, and even though I also don't
identify with those labels, I will tell you that the 10x programmer is
very real.[^2]

[^2]: This also came up in [Episode #54 of Talk Python to Me][ep54], while
      discussing my course, [Enterprise Software with Python][esp].

[ep54]: https://talkpython.fm/episodes/show/54/enterprise-software-with-python
[esp]: shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920047346.do

Every 10x programmer I know spends most days as a 1x something
else. Most 10x code is the result of observing and accumulating 10x
more domain knowledge, then being in the right place at the right
time. You do what ten developers off the street could never. I've been
there, and I have the commits to prove it. And when other aspects of
my life take priority, I'm an average programmer, focusing on my job
and its share of 1x work.

10x programming is a matter of insight and inspiration, confidence and
autonomy. This is a circumstance so unique that it creates an
obligation to teach software to the world. You never know when the
right 1x programmer is going to be in the right place to transform
their surroundings with a 10x moment. Many of the most creative people
I know understand very little about programming, and one can't help
but wonder what programming skills or insight might bring to their
process.

The great thing about Python is that you can teach so much programming
with so little overhead. You give those highly creative people even a
taste of programming and it opens up vast opportunities. Even just the
shared vocabulary is a huge boost to cross-pollination of ideas
between disciplines.

Look at Python use among biologists, neuroscientists, and other more
academics and analysts. Their amazing results speak volumes. Yet by
strict accounts their programming level wilts next to experienced
Python systems engineers working at YouTube, PayPal, Dropbox,
Continuum Analytics, etc.

It's inexcusable to put such a diverse group on this single bell curve
when their goals and disciplines are so different. Our language is the
same and our cultures are mutually beneficial. Seeing people measured
along this single dimension keeps me up at night.

Putting it all in terms of employment is harmful. Maximizing employee
utilization only creates more 1x programming. Software is more than
the industry of churning out code. A programmer is more than someone
who is paid to write software. A person is more than their profession.

<!-- * Physical tasks like labor and exercise are infinitely more
  quantifiable than programming tasks. -->

# The Privilege

It's said that the most sure sign of privilege is ignorance. Jacob
drives this all the way home, but not for lack of trying

From the beginning of the talk, he considers the immediate situation. He
disclaims most of his reputation, describes his origins as
unremarkable, and points out that his biggest contributions weren't
actually his. It's *really* not meaningful when someone at the top,
who has had a successful career full of recognition, tells you they
could've done better. Later on in the talk, while showcasing the face of
the privileged programmer, the 10x archetype, the person most likely
to be able to ride on their identity, he shares a chuckle at his own
resemblance.

Moving into Jacob's running-programming analogy, the anecdote got off
to a false start, but just kept going. Nobody stopped him to point out
that by virtue of simply *being* an ultra-runner, he *is* the top
tier. If you're in the 68th percentile of ultrarunners, then you're in
the top 1% of people who run, period. Even finishing a normal marathon
faster than the median time demonstrates talent and tremendous
physical gifts.

Jacob trimmed the y-axis, measured himself among the top tier, and
found himself only slightly better than mediocre. The sort of
guilt-inducing behavior that he claims leads people to leave the
field, unfolding right on stage.

# The Corporatism

Throughout the talk, Jacob cites some statistics. The one that stuck
with me was about an impending employment deficit. The U.S. government
projects 1.5 million unfilled programming jobs in the year 2020. This
becomes a central motivation for Jacob encouraging people to go into
software[^3]. Programming is immediately linked to coding for money.

Jacob says software is a skill, like any other. Programming is like
running marathons. Individuals are responsible for their own
training. But Jacob bears a message of hope: bosses will pay you to
run, even if you're not the fastest.

Too many managers are like Jacob, subtly redirecting the creative
potential of software into commodity labor. "We" need as many people
as possible to learn and teach programming because some a small
portion of society has decided to gamble money on software eating
everything in a very particular way.

On the contrary, people need exposure to programming for its
fundamental concepts. Software offers new ways of decomposing problems and
creating solutions, new approaches that are necessary to understand an
increasingly fast-paced and connected world. That is totally
irrespective of employment. Software design is a new way of thinking,
for all people, employed as programmers or not.

[^3]: "The US Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that by 2020 there
      will be a 1.5 million programming job gap, which means there
      will be that many jobs unfilled. That's in five years. The EU
      has published similar numbers, 1.2 million in 2018â€”three
      years. That means we need to be doing something to get more
      people into our industry."

# In short

Jacob is a much better runner than he gives himself credit for, but
programming is not running.

Software is much more than an industry. You don't need a programming
job to be a good programmmer.

Which brings me back to rephrasing the good parts we agree on, one
doesn't need to be a good programmer to make a difference with
software. Recognizing this, it follows that it's best for all of us to
accept and support programmers of all walks and skill levels.

[pycon_2016]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwTD5zJbsQGJN75MwbykYNw
